RHIDP-7833 Follow more logical user flow for authenticating with Azure (#1227)
redhat-developer/red-hat-developers-documentation-rhdh: modules/authentication/proc-enabling-user-authentication-with-microsoft-azure.adoc

[id="enabling-user-authentication-with-microsoft-azure"]
= Enabling user authentication with {azure-brand-name}

To authenticate users with {azure-brand-name}, configure the {azure-short} authentication provider in {product} and provision the users and groups from {azure-short} to the {product-short} software catalog.

.Prerequisites

> * You have the permission to register an application in {azure-brand-name}.

Author: Fix https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHIDP-7636

```suggestion
* You have the permission to register an application in {azure-short}.
Alternatively, you can ask your {azure-short} administrator to prepare the required {azure-short} application.
```

[id="enabling-user-authentication-with-microsoft-azure"]
= Enabling user authentication with {azure-brand-name}

To authenticate users with {azure-brand-name}, configure the {azure-short} authentication provider in {product} and provision the users and groups from {azure-short} to the {product-short} software catalog.

.Prerequisites
* You have the permission to register an application in {azure-short}.
Alternatively, you can ask your {azure-short} administrator to prepare the required {azure-short} application.

* You link:{configuring-book-url}[added a custom {product-short} application configuration], and have sufficient permissions to modify it.

* Your {product-short} backend can access the following hosts:

`login.microsoftonline.com`::
For obtaining and exchanging authorization codes and access tokens.

`graph.microsoft.com`::
For retrieving user profile information (as referenced in the source code), and avoiding an _Authentication failed, failed to fetch user profile_ error when attempting to log in.

.Procedure
:my-product-app-name-in-azure: <Authenticating with {product-short}>

> . To allow {product-short} to authenticate with {azure-brand-name}, link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity-platform/scenario-web-app-sign-user-app-registration?tabs=aspnetcore#register-an-app-by-using-the-azure-portal[create an OAuth application in {azure-short}].

Author: Let's use the title in Azure docs:

```suggestion
. To allow {product-short} to authenticate with {azure-short}, link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity-platform/scenario-web-app-sign-user-app-registration?tabs=aspnetcore#register-an-app-by-using-the-azure-portal[Register an app by using the {azure-short} portal].
```

> .. In the {azure-short} portal go to link:https://portal.azure.com/#view/Microsoft_AAD_RegisteredApps/ApplicationsListBlade[*App registrations*], create a **New registration** with the configuration:

Author: ```suggestion
.. Sign in to the [Microsoft Entra admin center](https://entra.microsoft.com/).

.. If you have access to multiple tenants, use the *Settings* icon in the top menu to switch to the tenant in which you want to register the application from the *Directories + subscriptions* menu.

.. Browse to *Entra ID > App registrations*, create a **New registration** with the configuration:
```

====

.. On the *Home > App registrations > __{my-product-app-name-in-azure}__ > Manage > Certificates & Secrets* page, in the *Client secrets* tab, create a *New client secret*.

.. Save the following values for the next step:
- **Directory (tenant) ID**
- **Application (client) ID**
- **Application (client) secret**

. To add your {azure-short} credentials to {product-short}, add the following key/value pairs to link:{configuring-dynamic-plugins-book-url}#provisioning-your-custom-configuration[your {product-short} secrets]:

`AUTH_AZURE_TENANT_ID`::
Enter your saved *Directory (tenant) ID*.

`AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_ID`::
Enter your saved *Application (client) ID*.

`AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET`::
Enter your saved *Application (client) secret*.

. Enable the Microsoft Graph organization provisioning plugin (`backstage-plugin-catalog-backend-module-msgraph-dynamic`).
This plugin ingests {azure-short} users and groups to the {product-short} software catalog.
+
.`dynamic-plugins.yaml` file fragment
[source,yaml]
----
plugins:
  - package: './dynamic-plugins/dist/backstage-plugin-catalog-backend-module-msgraph-dynamic'
    disabled: false
----

> +
> include::{docdir}/artifacts/snip-technology-preview.adoc[]

Author: Waiting for @kim-tsao approval:

```suggestion
```

.Prerequisites
* You have the permission to register an application in {azure-short}.
Alternatively, you can ask your {azure-short} administrator to prepare the required {azure-short} application.

* You link:{configuring-book-url}[added a custom {product-short} application configuration], and have sufficient permissions to modify it.

* Your {product-short} backend can access the following hosts:

`login.microsoftonline.com`::
This is the {azure-brand-name} authorization server, which enables the authentication flow.

`graph.microsoft.com`::
For retrieving organization data, including user and group data, to be ingested into the {product-short} catalog.

.Procedure
:my-product-app-name-in-azure: <Authenticating with {product-short}>
. To allow {product-short} to authenticate with {azure-short}, link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity-platform/scenario-web-app-sign-user-app-registration?tabs=aspnetcore#register-an-app-by-using-the-azure-portal[Register an app by using the {azure-short} portal].

> .. Sign in to the [Microsoft Entra admin center](https://entra.microsoft.com/).

Author: ```suggestion
.. Sign in to the link:https://entra.microsoft.com/[Microsoft Entra admin center].
```

.. If you have access to multiple tenants, use the *Settings* icon in the top menu to switch to the tenant in which you want to register the application from the *Directories + subscriptions* menu.

.. Browse to *Applications > App registrations*, and create a **New registration** with the configuration:

Name::
Enter a name to identify your application in {azure-short}, such as __{my-product-app-name-in-azure}__.

Supported account types::
Select *Accounts in this organizational directory only*.

Redirect URI::

Select a platform:::
Select *Web*.

URL:::
Enter the backend authentication URI set in {product-short}: `pass:c,a,q[{my-product-url}/api/auth/microsoft/handler/frame]`

> .. On the *Home > App registrations > __My {my-product-app-name-in-azure}__ > Manage > API permissions* page, *Add a Permission*, then add the following *Delegated permission* for the *Microsoft Graph API*:

Author: ```suggestion
.. On the *Applications > App registrations > __{my-product-app-name-in-azure}__ > Manage > API permissions* page, *Add a Permission*, select the *Microsoft Graph* API, and select the following *Application permission*:
```

> .. On the *Applications > App registrations > __{my-product-app-name-in-azure}__ > Manage > API permissions* page, *Add a Permission*, select the *Microsoft Graph* API, and select the following *Application permission*:

Author: ```suggestion
.. On the *Applications > App registrations > __{my-product-app-name-in-azure}__ > Manage > API permissions* page, click *Add a Permission*, click *Microsoft Graph*, click *Applications permissions*, and select the following permissions:
```

> * `email`
> * `offline_access`
> * `openid`
> * `profile`
> * `User.Read.All`
> * `GroupMember.Read.All`
> * Optional custom scopes for the Microsoft Graph API that you define both in this section and in the `{my-app-config-file}` {product-short} configuration file.

Author: ```suggestion
Application Permissions::

`User.Read.All`:::

`GroupMember.Read.All`:::

Delegated Permissions::

`email`:::

`offline_access`:::

`openid`:::

`profile`:::

Optional::: Enter optional custom scopes for the Microsoft Graph API that you define both in this section and in the `{my-app-config-file}` {product-short} configuration file.
```

+
[NOTE]
====
Your company might require you to grant admin consent for these permissions.
Even if your company does not require admin consent, you might do so as it means users do not need to individually consent the first time they access backstage.
To grant administrator consent, a directory administrator must go to the link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/manage-apps/user-admin-consent-overview[admin consent] page and click *Grant admin consent for COMPANY NAME*.
====

.. On the *Applications > App registrations > __{my-product-app-name-in-azure}__ > Manage > Certificates & secrets* page, in the *Client secrets* tab, create a *New client secret*.

.. Save the following values for the next step:
- **Directory (tenant) ID**

> - **Application (client) ID**
> - **Application (client) secret**

Author: ```suggestion
- **Application (client) ID**
- **Application (client) Secret ID**
```

.. Sign in to the link:https://entra.microsoft.com/[Microsoft Entra admin center].

.. Optional: If you have access to multiple tenants, use the *Settings* icon in the top menu to switch to the tenant in which you want to register the application from the *Directories + subscriptions* menu.

.. Browse to *Applications > App registrations*, and create a **New registration** with the configuration:

Name::
Enter a name to identify your application in {azure-short}, such as __{my-product-app-name-in-azure}__.

Supported account types::
Select *Accounts in this organizational directory only*.

Redirect URI::

Select a platform:::
Select *Web*.

URL:::
Enter the backend authentication URI set in {product-short}: `pass:c,a,q[{my-product-url}/api/auth/microsoft/handler/frame]`

.. On the *Applications > App registrations > __{my-product-app-name-in-azure}__ > Manage > API permissions* page, *Add a Permission*, *Microsoft Graph*, select the following permissions:

Application Permissions::

> `User.Read.All`:::
> `GroupMember.Read.All`:::
> Enter permissions that enable provisioning user and groups to the {product-short} software catalog.
> +
> Optional: *Grant admin consent* for these permissions.
> Even if your company does not require admin consent, consider doing so as it means users do not need to individually consent the first time they access {product-short}.
> 
> Delegated Permissions::
> `email`:::

Author: ```suggestion
`GroupMember.Read.All`:::
Enter permissions that enable provisioning user and groups to the {product-short} software catalog.
+
Optional: *Grant admin consent* for these permissions.
Even if your company does not require admin consent, consider doing so as it means users do not need to individually consent the first time they access {product-short}.

Delegated Permissions::
`User.Read.All`:::
`email`:::
```

    disabled: false
----
+
include::{docdir}/artifacts/snip-technology-preview.adoc[]

. To provision {azure-short} users and groups to the {product-short} software catalog, add the `catalog.providers.microsoftGraphOrg` section to your custom {product-short} `{my-app-config-file}` configuration file:
+
--
[id=microsoftGraphOrgProviderId]
.`{my-app-config-file}` fragment with mandatory `microsoftGraphOrg` fields
[source,yaml]
----
catalog:
  providers:
    microsoftGraphOrg:
      providerId:
        target: https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0
        tenantId: ${AUTH_AZURE_TENANT_ID}
        clientId: ${AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_ID}
        clientSecret: ${AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET}
        schedule:
          frequency:
            hours: 1
          timeout:
            minutes: 50
          initialDelay:
            minutes: 50
----

`target`::
Enter `\https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0` to define the MSGraph API endpoint the provider is connecting to.
You might change this parameter to use a different version, such as the link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/graph/api/overview?view=graph-rest-beta#call-the-beta-endpoint[beta endpoint].

`tenandId`::

> Enter the configured secret variable name: `${AUTHENTICATION_AZURE_TENANT_ID}`.

Reviewer: Please make the env var names consistent throughout

          hours: 24
----

`signIn`::

`resolvers`:::
After successful authentication, {product-short} resolves the user signing in to an existing user in the {product-short} catalog.
To best match users securely for your use case, consider configuring a specific resolver.
+
Enter the resolver list to override the default resolver: `userIdMatchingUserEntityAnnotation`.
+
The authentication provider tries each sign-in resolver in order until it succeeds, and fails if none succeed.
+
WARNING: In production mode, only configure one resolver to ensure users are securely matched.
+
.`app-config-rhdh.yaml` fragment with optional field to allow signing in users absent from the software catalog
[source,yaml]
----
auth:
  environment: production
  providers:
    microsoft:
      production:
        clientId: ${AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_ID}
        clientSecret: ${AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET}
        tenantId: ${AUTH_AZURE_TENANT_ID}
        signIn:
          resolvers:
            - resolver: usernameMatchingUserEntityName
              dangerouslyAllowSignInWithoutUserInCatalog: true
signInPage: microsoft
----

`resolver`::::
Enter the sign-in resolver name.
Available resolvers:

> * `userIdMatchingUserEntityAnnotation`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `emailMatchingUserEntityAnnotation`
```

This resolver: "Looks up the user by matching their Microsoft email to the email entity annotation."

* `emailLocalPartMatchingUserEntityName`
* `emailMatchingUserEntityProfileEmail`

`dangerouslyAllowSignInWithoutUserInCatalog: true`::::
Configure the sign-in resolver to bypass the user provisioning requirement in the {product-short} software catalog.
+
WARNING: Use `dangerouslyAllowSignInWithoutUserInCatalog` to explore {product-short} features, but do not use it in production.
--

.Verification
. To verify user and group provisioning, check the console logs for `MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider` events.
+
.Successful synchronization example:

> [source,json]
> ----
> backend:start: {"class":"MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider$1","level":"info","message":"Read 1 msgraph users and 1 msgraph groups in 2.2 seconds. Committing...","plugin":"catalog","service":"backstage","taskId":"MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider:default:refresh","taskInstanceId":"88a67ce1-c466-41a4-9760-825e16b946be","timestamp":"2024-06-26 12:23:42"}
> backend:start: {"class":"MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider$1","level":"info","message":"Committed 1 msgraph users and 1 msgraph groups in 0.0 seconds.","plugin":"catalog","service":"backstage","taskId":"MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider:default:refresh","taskInstanceId":"88a67ce1-c466-41a4-9760-825e16b946be","timestamp":"2024-06-26 12:23:42"}

Author: So no more json.

```suggestion
[source]
----
2025-06-23T13:37:55.804Z catalog info Read 9 msgraph users and 3 msgraph groups in 1.5 seconds. Committing... class="MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider" taskId="MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider:providerId:refresh" taskInstanceId="e104a116-6481-4ceb-9bc4-0f8f9581f959" trace_id="e4c633659cffd6b1529afa55a5bfbad7" span_id="76affd0420e8baa6" trace_flags="01"

2025-06-23T13:37:55.811Z catalog info Committed 9 msgraph users and 3 msgraph groups in 0.0 seconds. class="MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider" taskId="MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider:providerId:refresh" taskInstanceId="e104a116-6481-4ceb-9bc4-0f8f9581f959" trace_id="e4c633659cffd6b1529afa55a5bfbad7" span_id="76affd0420e8baa6" trace_flags="01"
```

----

. To verify {azure-short} user authentication:
.. Go to the {product-short} login page.

> .. Your {product-short} sign-in page displays *Sign in using {azure-short}* and the Guest user sign-in is disabled.

Reviewer: The sign in page will say `Sign in using Microsoft`

<img width="374" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/238cf6ea-9ef1-4ac6-8983-c1915b5d383d" />

.. Sign in to the link:https://entra.microsoft.com/[Microsoft Entra admin center].

.. Optional: If you have access to multiple tenants, use the *Settings* icon in the top menu to switch to the tenant in which you want to register the application from the *Directories + subscriptions* menu.

.. Browse to *Applications > App registrations*, and create a **New registration** with the configuration:

Name::
Enter a name to identify your application in {azure-short}, such as __{my-product-app-name-in-azure}__.

Supported account types::
Select *Accounts in this organizational directory only*.

Redirect URI::

Select a platform:::
Select *Web*.

URL:::
Enter the backend authentication URI set in {product-short}: `pass:c,a,q[{my-product-url}/api/auth/microsoft/handler/frame]`

.. On the *Applications > App registrations > __{my-product-app-name-in-azure}__ > Manage > API permissions* page, *Add a Permission*, *Microsoft Graph*, select the following permissions:

Application Permissions::

> `GroupMember.Read.All`:::

Author: Reading https://github.com/backstage/backstage/blob/201add3d17ef6aecc9f769d27939f233ced2edb3/plugins/catalog-backend-module-msgraph/README.md we might need this:

```suggestion
`GroupMember.Read.All`:::
`User.Read.All`:::
```

Can you confirm @JessicaJHee @kim-tsao that we have to add the `User.Read.All` permission twice, and that the delegated permission would not be enough?

Reviewer: Yes - the Delegated permission (for the user signing in) should have `User.Read`.

The application permission (for the backend catalog plugin) needs `User.Read.All`.

Enter permissions that enable provisioning user and groups to the {product-short} software catalog.
+
Optional: *Grant admin consent* for these permissions.
Even if your company does not require admin consent, consider doing so as it means users do not need to individually consent the first time they access {product-short}.

Delegated Permissions::

> `User.Read.All`:::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`User.Read`:::
```

.. Sign in to the link:https://entra.microsoft.com/[Microsoft Entra admin center].

.. If you have access to multiple tenants, use the *Settings* icon in the top menu to switch to the tenant in which you want to register the application from the *Directories + subscriptions* menu.

.. Browse to *Applications > App registrations*, and create a **New registration** with the configuration:

Name::
Enter a name to identify your application in {azure-short}, such as __{my-product-app-name-in-azure}__.

Supported account types::
Select *Accounts in this organizational directory only*.

Redirect URI::

Select a platform:::
Select *Web*.

URL:::
Enter the backend authentication URI set in {product-short}: `pass:c,a,q[{my-product-url}/api/auth/microsoft/handler/frame]`

.. On the *Applications > App registrations > __{my-product-app-name-in-azure}__ > Manage > API permissions* page, click *Add a Permission*, click *Microsoft Graph*, click *Applications permissions*, and select the following permissions:

> Application Permissions::
> Enter permissions that enable provisioning user and groups to the {product-short} software catalog.
> 
> `User.Read.All`:::
> 
> `GroupMember.Read.All`:::
> 
> Delegated Permissions::
> Enter permissions that enable authenticating users.
> 
> `email`:::
> 
> `offline_access`:::
> 
> `openid`:::
> 
> `profile`:::
> 
> Optional::: Enter optional custom scopes for the Microsoft Graph API that you define both in this section and in the `{my-app-config-file}` {product-short} configuration file.
> +
> [NOTE]
> ====
> Your company might require you to grant admin consent for these permissions.
> Even if your company does not require admin consent, you might do so as it means users do not need to individually consent the first time they access backstage.
> To grant administrator consent, a directory administrator must go to the link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/manage-apps/user-admin-consent-overview[admin consent] page and click *Grant admin consent for COMPANY NAME*.
> ====

Author: ```suggestion
Application Permissions::
`User.Read.All`:::
`GroupMember.Read.All`:::
Enter permissions that enable provisioning user and groups to the {product-short} software catalog.
+
Optional: *Grant admin consent* for these permissions.
Even if your company does not require admin consent, consider doing so as it means users do not need to individually consent the first time they access {product-short}.

Delegated Permissions::
`email`:::
`offline_access`:::
`openid`:::
`profile`:::
Enter permissions that enable authenticating users.
+
Optional: Enter optional custom scopes for the Microsoft Graph API that you define both in this section and in the `{my-app-config-file}` {product-short} configuration file.

```

          resolvers:
            - resolver: usernameMatchingUserEntityName
              dangerouslyAllowSignInWithoutUserInCatalog: true
signInPage: microsoft
----

`resolver`::::
Enter the sign-in resolver name.
Available resolvers:

* `userIdMatchingUserEntityAnnotation`
* `emailLocalPartMatchingUserEntityName`
* `emailMatchingUserEntityProfileEmail`

`dangerouslyAllowSignInWithoutUserInCatalog: true`::::
Configure the sign-in resolver to bypass the user provisioning requirement in the {product-short} software catalog.
+
WARNING: Use `dangerouslyAllowSignInWithoutUserInCatalog` to explore {product-short} features, but do not use it in production.
--

.Verification
. To verify user and group provisioning, check the console logs for `MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider` events.
+
.Successful synchronization example:
[source,json]
----
backend:start: {"class":"MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider$1","level":"info","message":"Read 1 msgraph users and 1 msgraph groups in 2.2 seconds. Committing...","plugin":"catalog","service":"backstage","taskId":"MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider:default:refresh","taskInstanceId":"88a67ce1-c466-41a4-9760-825e16b946be","timestamp":"2024-06-26 12:23:42"}

> backend:start: {"class":"MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider$1","level":"info","message":"Committed 1 msgraph users and 1 msgraph groups in 0.0 seconds.","plugin":"catalog","service":"backstage","taskId":"MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider:default:refresh","taskInstanceId":"88a67ce1-c466-41a4-9760-825e16b946be","timestamp":"2024-06-26 12:23:42"}

Reviewer: `2025-06-23T13:37:55.804Z catalog info Read 9 msgraph users and 3 msgraph groups in 1.5 seconds. Committing... class="MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider" taskId="MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider:providerId:refresh" taskInstanceId="e104a116-6481-4ceb-9bc4-0f8f9581f959" trace_id="e4c633659cffd6b1529afa55a5bfbad7" span_id="76affd0420e8baa6" trace_flags="01"`

`2025-06-23T13:37:55.811Z catalog info Committed 9 msgraph users and 3 msgraph groups in 0.0 seconds. class="MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider" taskId="MicrosoftGraphOrgEntityProvider:providerId:refresh" taskInstanceId="e104a116-6481-4ceb-9bc4-0f8f9581f959" trace_id="e4c633659cffd6b1529afa55a5bfbad7" span_id="76affd0420e8baa6" trace_flags="01"`
